tutorials/06-screenplay-editor-capstone/README.md, before:

# 06 – Screenplay Editor Capstone

Template-first workflow: `setup.sh` scaffolds a minimal Swift package from the FountainAI monorepo; build and run locally to explore the concept.

Combine UI (Teatro), persistence (FountainStore), multimedia (MIDI2), and AI (OpenAPI) into a simple screenplay editor. This capstone still uses the template-driven SPM workflow; no full platform services are required, though AI calls can target a local or hosted gateway.

## Before you begin
- Run all commands from `tutorials/06-screenplay-editor-capstone/`.
- If needed, make the script executable:
  ```bash
  chmod +x setup.sh
  ```

## Setup
Run the setup script with the capstone profile to include AI, persistence, and MIDI2 libraries:

```bash
./setup.sh --profile capstone --upstream
```

Advanced: `./setup.sh --upstream` (or `SETUP_MODE=upstream ./setup.sh`) attempts to scaffold via the upstream monorepo and copy its generated files here; falls back to local if it fails.

## UI with Teatro
The interface layout is defined in [MainScene.teatro](./MainScene.teatro). Buttons emit events that trigger saving notes, playing cues, and requesting AI help.

## Persistence with FountainStore
[NoteStore.swift](./NoteStore.swift) stores notes on disk using `FountainStore`. The UI calls `save` when the `save-note` event fires.

## Multimedia with MIDI2
[CuePlayer.ts](./CuePlayer.ts) loads [cue.mid](./cue.mid) and plays it back. During playback it can publish position updates for the UI.

## AI Assistance via OpenAPI
[AIClient.swift](./AIClient.swift) wraps the FountainAI `/v1/generate` endpoint. The `ask-ai` event sends a prompt and returns generated text.

## Integration Points
- `MainScene.teatro` emits `save-note`, `play-cue`, and `ask-ai` events.
- `NoteStore.swift` persists text when `save-note` occurs.
- `CuePlayer.ts` handles `play-cue` and updates the interface with timing data.
- `AIClient.swift` processes `ask-ai` and its results can be stored via the note store.

For a detailed end-to-end build, consult the [PDF guide](./Building%20a%20macOS%20Screenplay%20Editor%20with%20Teatro%2C%20FountainAI%2C%20and%20MIDI2.pdf).

## Build and run
Compile and launch the project:

```bash
swift build
swift run
```

Expected: The GUI shows a main scene with buttons to save notes, play a cue, and request AI help. Console logs reflect events and actions.

Tip (macOS app bundle): Inside the FountainAI monorepo, you can bundle with `Scripts/make_app.sh ScreenplayEditor` and open `dist/ScreenplayEditor.app`.

## Troubleshooting
- Permission denied: `chmod +x setup.sh` and re-run.
- MIDI not playing: verify `cue.mid` path and audio permissions.
- AI errors: confirm `FOUNTAIN_AI_KEY`/`LLM_GATEWAY_URL` are set and reachable.

## Run tests
```bash
swift test
```
Add tests for persistence helpers, cue timing calculations, and any model-formatting logic.

## Next steps
Explore deeper integration in the upstream monorepo (Gateway plugins, persistence services) or extend the editor with scenes, formatting, and export.

## See also
- [Deep dive: Dependency management with SwiftPM and profiles](../../docs/dependency-management-deep-dive.md)

Commit message:

Update tutorial profiles and add starter code
Changed default setup profiles in tutorial setup scripts to 'ai' and updated README instructions for clarity. Added starter Swift files, package manifests, and basic test cases for new tutorials: data persistence (FountainStore), multimedia (Midi2), AI integration (OpenAPI), and screenplay editor (ScreenplayEditor). Minor improvements to main app structure in hello-fountainai tutorial.

tutorials/06-screenplay-editor-capstone/README.md, after:

# 06 – Screenplay Editor Capstone

Template-first workflow: `setup.sh` scaffolds a minimal Swift package from the FountainAI monorepo; build and run locally to explore the concept.

Combine UI (Teatro), persistence (FountainStore), multimedia (MIDI2), and AI (OpenAPI) into a simple screenplay editor. This capstone still uses the template-driven SPM workflow; no full platform services are required, though AI calls can target a local or hosted gateway.

## Before you begin
- Run all commands from `tutorials/06-screenplay-editor-capstone/`.
- If needed, make the script executable:
  ```bash
  chmod +x setup.sh
  ```

## Setup
By default this tutorial uses the `ai` profile. To include AI + persistence + MIDI2 libraries all together, use the `capstone` profile:

```bash
./setup.sh --profile capstone --upstream
```

Advanced: `./setup.sh --upstream` (or `SETUP_MODE=upstream ./setup.sh`) attempts to scaffold via the upstream monorepo and copy its generated files here; falls back to local if it fails.

## UI with Teatro
The interface layout is defined in [MainScene.teatro](./MainScene.teatro). Buttons emit events that trigger saving notes, playing cues, and requesting AI help.

## Persistence with FountainStore
[NoteStore.swift](./NoteStore.swift) stores notes on disk using `FountainStore`. The UI calls `save` when the `save-note` event fires.

## Multimedia with MIDI2
[CuePlayer.ts](./CuePlayer.ts) loads [cue.mid](./cue.mid) and plays it back. During playback it can publish position updates for the UI.

## AI Assistance via OpenAPI
[AIClient.swift](./AIClient.swift) wraps the FountainAI `/v1/generate` endpoint. The `ask-ai` event sends a prompt and returns generated text.

## Integration Points
- `MainScene.teatro` emits `save-note`, `play-cue`, and `ask-ai` events.
- `NoteStore.swift` persists text when `save-note` occurs.
- `CuePlayer.ts` handles `play-cue` and updates the interface with timing data.
- `AIClient.swift` processes `ask-ai` and its results can be stored via the note store.

For a detailed end-to-end build, consult the [PDF guide](./Building%20a%20macOS%20Screenplay%20Editor%20with%20Teatro%2C%20FountainAI%2C%20and%20MIDI2.pdf).

## Build and run
Compile and launch the project:

```bash
swift build
swift run
```

Expected: The GUI shows a main scene with buttons to save notes, play a cue, and request AI help. Console logs reflect events and actions.

Tip (macOS app bundle): Inside the FountainAI monorepo, you can bundle with `Scripts/make_app.sh ScreenplayEditor` and open `dist/ScreenplayEditor.app`.

## Troubleshooting
- Permission denied: `chmod +x setup.sh` and re-run.
- MIDI not playing: verify `cue.mid` path and audio permissions.
- AI errors: confirm `FOUNTAIN_AI_KEY`/`LLM_GATEWAY_URL` are set and reachable.

## Run tests
```bash
swift test
```
Add tests for persistence helpers, cue timing calculations, and any model-formatting logic.

## Next steps
Explore deeper integration in the upstream monorepo (Gateway plugins, persistence services) or extend the editor with scenes, formatting, and export.

## See also
- [Deep dive: Dependency management with SwiftPM and profiles](../../docs/dependency-management-deep-dive.md)
