tutorials/07-csound-studio/README.md, before:

# 07 – Csound Studio (Chat + Drop)

A small macOS SwiftUI app that combines two panes:
- Left: Chat with an LLM about Csound (ask for instruments/scores); paste or insert generated `.csd`.
- Right: Drag & Drop area for `.csd` files — play the result and optionally export/engrave a LilyPond score.

Everything runs locally. The only remote hop is the Gateway’s outbound HTTPS call to your provider (e.g., OpenAI) using your API key.

## Run Locally (SwiftUI App)

```bash
cd tutorials/07-csound-studio
./run.sh open     # macOS: opens the SwiftPM project in Xcode
# or
./run.sh build && ./run.sh run
```

- Playback uses `afplay` (macOS) from a temporary WAV file. If audio isn’t available, the WAV path is printed.
- LilyPond PDFs require `lilypond` installed; exporting still writes a `.ly` file if LilyPond isn’t present.

## Optional: LLM Chat

To request `.csd` from a local Gateway (no Docker), run the Gateway from source and export your provider key:

```bash
# From repo root
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
Scripts/run-gateway-source.sh start --dev --no-auth

# Then in another terminal
cd tutorials/07-csound-studio
export LLM_GATEWAY_URL=http://127.0.0.1:8080/api/v1
export FOUNTAIN_AI_KEY=local-dev-key
./run.sh run
```

Inside the app, type a prompt (e.g., “Write a Csound .csd with a gentle envelope and a 3‑note motif at 120 BPM. Output only .csd.”) and click “Ask”. If the Gateway is healthy, the chat pane shows the response and you can paste it into the right pane to play/export.

## Project Layout

- `Sources/CsoundStudio/App.swift` — SwiftUI entry.
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/MainSplitView.swift` — two‑pane layout (chat + drop).
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/ChatView.swift` — simple Gateway chat client (local Gateway).
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/DropZoneView.swift` — drag/drop `.csd`, play/export.
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/CsoundPlayer.swift` — minimal simulator for `.csd` → samples.
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/Playback.swift` — writes WAV + tries `afplay`.
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/LilyPond.swift` — export `.ly` and try engraving via `lilypond`.

## Test

```bash
./run.sh test
```

Runs a minimal unit test that verifies `CsoundPlayer` can synthesize samples from a tiny in‑memory `.csd`.

Commit message:

Add Toolsmith VM integration for LilyPond and Csound
Integrates Toolsmith VM support to run LilyPond engraving and Csound synthesis inside a QEMU VM, avoiding the need for local installations. Adds settings UI for enabling Toolsmith, image path selection, and VM provisioning workflow with a shell script. Updates DropZoneView and playback logic to use Toolsmith when configured, and provides fallback behavior. Includes documentation and helper code for VM verification and usage.

tutorials/07-csound-studio/README.md, after:

# 07 – Csound Studio (Chat + Drop)

A small macOS SwiftUI app that combines two panes:
- Left: Chat with an LLM about Csound (ask for instruments/scores); paste or insert generated `.csd`.
- Right: Drag & Drop area for `.csd` files — play the result and optionally export/engrave a LilyPond score.

Everything runs locally. The only remote hop is the Gateway’s outbound HTTPS call to your provider (e.g., OpenAI) using your API key.

## Run Locally (SwiftUI App)

```bash
cd tutorials/07-csound-studio
./run.sh open     # macOS: opens the SwiftPM project in Xcode
# or
./run.sh build && ./run.sh run
```

- Playback uses `afplay` (macOS) from a temporary WAV file. If audio isn’t available, the WAV path is printed.
- LilyPond PDFs require `lilypond` installed; exporting still writes a `.ly` file if LilyPond isn’t present.

## Optional: LLM Chat

To request `.csd` from a local Gateway (no Docker), run the Gateway from source and export your provider key:

```bash
# From repo root
export OPENAI_API_KEY="sk-..."
Scripts/run-gateway-source.sh start --dev --no-auth

# Then in another terminal
cd tutorials/07-csound-studio
export LLM_GATEWAY_URL=http://127.0.0.1:8080/api/v1
export FOUNTAIN_AI_KEY=local-dev-key
./run.sh run
```

Inside the app, type a prompt (e.g., “Write a Csound .csd with a gentle envelope and a 3‑note motif at 120 BPM. Output only .csd.”) and click “Ask”. If the Gateway is healthy, the chat pane shows the response and you can paste it into the right pane to play/export.

## Project Layout

- `Sources/CsoundStudio/App.swift` — SwiftUI entry.
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/MainSplitView.swift` — two‑pane layout (chat + drop).
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/ChatView.swift` — simple Gateway chat client (local Gateway).
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/DropZoneView.swift` — drag/drop `.csd`, play/export.
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/CsoundPlayer.swift` — minimal simulator for `.csd` → samples.
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/Playback.swift` — writes WAV + tries `afplay`.
- `Sources/CsoundStudio/LilyPond.swift` — export `.ly` and try engraving via `lilypond`.
 - `Sources/CsoundStudio/ToolsmithIntegration.swift` — optional QEMU path using Toolsmith runners.

## Toolsmith Option (No Local LilyPond/Csound)

This app can run LilyPond engraving and Csound synthesis inside a Toolsmith-provisioned VM image so you don’t need to install those tools on your host.

- Open Settings → enable “Use Toolsmith VM…” and set the path to a Linux image (`.qcow2/.img`) that includes `lilypond` and `csound`.
- When LilyPond is missing locally, the app will attempt to engrave via the VM. Likewise, the Play button can synthesize audio via the VM when enabled.
- If the VM path isn’t available, the app falls back to copy‑ready `.ly` and a built‑in Csound simulator.

Click “Prepare Toolsmith VM…” in Settings to build a ready image automatically (downloads Ubuntu cloud image and provisions LilyPond/Csound). The script runs locally and prints the final image path; the app fills it in for you.

Details and manual steps are in TOOLSMITH.md.

## Test

```bash
./run.sh test
```

Runs a minimal unit test that verifies `CsoundPlayer` can synthesize samples from a tiny in‑memory `.csd`.
