docs/dependency-management-deep-dive.md, before:

# Dependency Management Deep Dive (SwiftPM + FountainAI)

This guide explains how tutorial apps depend on the FountainAI monorepo using Swift Package Manager (SwiftPM), what each profile includes, and how resolution, pinning, and updates work.

## SwiftPM Basics
- Package: A project with `Package.swift` describing products (binaries) and targets (modules).
- Dependency: Another package added via `.package(url: ..., version/branch/revision)`.
- Product: A library or executable a target can depend on (e.g., `LLMGatewayAPI`).
- Resolution: SwiftPM fetches dependencies and builds only referenced targets and their transitives.

## How Tutorials Use FountainAI
- Local mode (`./setup.sh`): Generates a minimal app (no external deps) for fast loops and unit tests.
- Upstream mode (`./setup.sh --upstream`): Copies a scaffolded `main.swift` and generates a local `Package.swift` that points to the FountainAI monorepo.
- Profiles (`--profile <name>`): Select which client libraries your target depends on; SwiftPM builds only those and their transitives.

## Profiles → Modules
- basic: no external modules.
- ai: `FountainAICore`, `FountainAIAdapters`, `LLMGatewayAPI`.
- persist: `PersistAPI`, `FountainStoreClient` (plus core/adapters).
- midi2: `MIDI2Models`, `MIDI2Core`, `SSEOverMIDI`, `FlexBridge`.
- capstone: union of ai + persist + midi2.
- full-client: `GatewayAPI`, `LLMGatewayAPI`, `PersistAPI`, `SemanticBrowserAPI` (plus core/adapters).

## Versioning & Pinning
- Default: `main` branch of FountainAI for rapid iteration.
- Stable builds: pin a tag or commit in `Package.swift`:
  - Tag: `.package(url: "...", from: "1.2.3")`
  - Commit: `.package(url: "...", revision: "<sha>")`
- `Package.resolved` is generated by SwiftPM; commit it to lock transitive versions.

## Build, Run, Test
- Build: `swift build` compiles your app and required modules.
- Run: `swift run` executes the app.
- Tests: `swift test` runs XCTest targets; all tutorials scaffold tests by default.
- Xcode: `xed .` opens the package; Xcode uses the same resolution.

## Updates & Caching
- Update FountainAI: `swift package update` (or bump the version in `Package.swift`).
- Cache: SwiftPM caches downloads/builds; only changed targets rebuild when you switch profiles.

## Troubleshooting
- Missing modules: ensure you used a profile that includes the needed products and re-run `./setup.sh --profile <name> --upstream`.
- Build fails on macOS: install Xcode CLT and accept the license; try `xcodebuild -runFirstLaunch`.
- Network issues: retry after connectivity restores; SwiftPM resumes from cache when possible.

## Rationale
- Profiles keep tutorial builds fast and focused while enabling deeper integration when needed.
- App-facing modules avoid server executables and plugins unless you explicitly opt in.

Commit message:

Rename FountainStore to TutorialFountainStore
Updated package, target, and test names from FountainStore to TutorialFountainStore for clarity and to avoid SwiftPM identity mismatch issues. Added documentation to README and dependency management guide explaining SwiftPM override identity requirements and how to resolve related errors.

docs/dependency-management-deep-dive.md, after:

# Dependency Management Deep Dive (SwiftPM + FountainAI)

This guide explains how tutorial apps depend on the FountainAI monorepo using Swift Package Manager (SwiftPM), what each profile includes, and how resolution, pinning, and updates work.

## SwiftPM Basics
- Package: A project with `Package.swift` describing products (binaries) and targets (modules).
- Dependency: Another package added via `.package(url: ..., version/branch/revision)`.
- Product: A library or executable a target can depend on (e.g., `LLMGatewayAPI`).
- Resolution: SwiftPM fetches dependencies and builds only referenced targets and their transitives.

## How Tutorials Use FountainAI
- Local mode (`./setup.sh`): Generates a minimal app (no external deps) for fast loops and unit tests.
- Upstream mode (`./setup.sh --upstream`): Copies a scaffolded `main.swift` and generates a local `Package.swift` that points to the FountainAI monorepo.
- Profiles (`--profile <name>`): Select which client libraries your target depends on; SwiftPM builds only those and their transitives.

## Profiles → Modules
- basic: no external modules.
- ai: `FountainAICore`, `FountainAIAdapters`, `LLMGatewayAPI`.
- persist: `PersistAPI`, `FountainStoreClient` (plus core/adapters).
- midi2: `MIDI2Models`, `MIDI2Core`, `SSEOverMIDI`, `FlexBridge`.
- capstone: union of ai + persist + midi2.
- full-client: `GatewayAPI`, `LLMGatewayAPI`, `PersistAPI`, `SemanticBrowserAPI` (plus core/adapters).

## Versioning & Pinning
- Default: `main` branch of FountainAI for rapid iteration.
- Stable builds: pin a tag or commit in `Package.swift`:
  - Tag: `.package(url: "...", from: "1.2.3")`
  - Commit: `.package(url: "...", revision: "<sha>")`
- `Package.resolved` is generated by SwiftPM; commit it to lock transitive versions.

## Build, Run, Test
- Build: `swift build` compiles your app and required modules.
- Run: `swift run` executes the app.
- Tests: `swift test` runs XCTest targets; all tutorials scaffold tests by default.
- Xcode: `xed .` opens the package; Xcode uses the same resolution.

## Updates & Caching
- Update FountainAI: `swift package update` (or bump the version in `Package.swift`).
- Cache: SwiftPM caches downloads/builds; only changed targets rebuild when you switch profiles.

## Troubleshooting
- Missing modules: ensure you used a profile that includes the needed products and re-run `./setup.sh --profile <name> --upstream`.
- Build fails on macOS: install Xcode CLT and accept the license; try `xcodebuild -runFirstLaunch`.
- Network issues: retry after connectivity restores; SwiftPM resumes from cache when possible.

### Package Override Identity Mismatch (SwiftPM)

Symptom (in CI or local):

> unable to override package 'FountainStore' because its identity 'fountain-store' doesn't match override's identity (directory name) '03-data-persistence-fountainstore'

Why:
- SwiftPM uses the last path component to determine a package’s identity for local overrides. The directory name must match the dependency identity. For FountainStore, the identity is `fountain-store`.

Fix options:
- Rename the override directory to match the identity, or create a symlink with the correct name and point your override path to it.
  - Example symlink:
    - `ln -s "$PWD/tutorials/03-data-persistence-fountainstore" "$PWD/../fountain-store"`
    - Update your override path to `../fountain-store`.
- Update the path in your manifest (or workspace override) to reference the correctly named directory:
  - Instead of `../03-data-persistence-fountainstore`, use `../fountain-store`.

CI helper snippet (GitHub Actions):

```yaml
- name: Prepare SwiftPM overrides
  run: |
    ln -s "$GITHUB_WORKSPACE/tutorials/03-data-persistence-fountainstore" "$GITHUB_WORKSPACE/overrides/fountain-store" || true
```

Summary: the override directory name must equal the dependency identity (`fountain-store`). Rename the directory or point your override to a correctly named directory/symlink.

## Rationale
- Profiles keep tutorial builds fast and focused while enabling deeper integration when needed.
- App-facing modules avoid server executables and plugins unless you explicitly opt in.
