tutorials/04-multimedia-midi2/README.md, before:

# 04 – Multimedia with MIDI2

Template-first workflow: `setup.sh` scaffolds a minimal Swift package from the FountainAI monorepo; build and run locally to explore the concept.

Play audio and synchronize your UI using MIDI 2.0 timing. This lesson shows TypeScript snippets for a browser/Node context; your minimal Swift package scaffolding is for project structure only and does not execute the TS directly.

## Before you begin
- Run all commands from `tutorials/04-multimedia-midi2/`.
- If needed, make the script executable:
  ```bash
  chmod +x setup.sh
  ```

## Scaffold the project
By default this tutorial uses the `ai` profile. If you plan to use Swift MIDI2 libraries locally, run with the `midi2` profile:

```bash
./setup.sh --profile midi2 --upstream
```

Advanced: `./setup.sh --upstream` (or `SETUP_MODE=upstream ./setup.sh`) attempts to scaffold via the upstream monorepo and copy its generated files here; falls back to local if it fails.

## Playing audio (TypeScript)

Load a MIDI file and route it into an `AudioContext`. The player will handle decoding and playback once `play()` is called:

```ts
import { Midi2Player } from '@fountainlabs/midi2';

const context = new AudioContext();
const player = new Midi2Player({ context });

await player.load('/assets/cue.mid');
player.play();
```

## Synchronizing UI via MIDI2 (TypeScript)

During playback, the player emits timing information that can drive interface updates. Listen for `position` events to keep the UI in sync with the audio:

```ts
player.on('position', (seconds) => {
  document.querySelector('#time').textContent = seconds.toFixed(1);
});
```

## Play/Pause controls (HTML + TypeScript)

Hook simple controls into the player with standard DOM events:

```html
<button id="play">Play</button>
<button id="pause">Pause</button>
<script type="module">
  import { Midi2Player } from '@fountainlabs/midi2';

  const context = new AudioContext();
  const player = new Midi2Player({ context });
  await player.load('/assets/cue.mid');

  document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('click', () => player.play());
  document.getElementById('pause').addEventListener('click', () => player.pause());
</script>
```

These snippets demonstrate how audio playback and UI synchronization can be achieved using MIDI 2.0. Use a simple static server or bundler to run them.

## Build and run (Swift package)
Compile and launch the minimal Swift package (for structure only):

```bash
../../tools/tutor-cli/.build/release/tutor-cli build
../../tools/tutor-cli/.build/release/tutor-cli run
```

Expected: Swift package builds successfully. The MIDI2 examples run in a browser or Node environment.

## Run tests
```bash
../../tools/tutor-cli/.build/release/tutor-cli test
```
Keep Swift tests focused on any local helpers; test TS code with your chosen runner (e.g., Vitest) in a separate step.

## Troubleshooting
- AudioContext blocked: user gesture may be required before playback in some browsers.
- Asset path: ensure `cue.mid` resolves (serve from `/assets/` or adjust `load()` path).
- TypeScript types: install `@types/node` or browser typings if bundling for the web.

## Next steps
Proceed to [05 – AI Integration with OpenAPI](../05-ai-integration-openapi/README.md) to call AI endpoints.

## See also
- [Deep dive: Dependency management with SwiftPM and profiles](../../docs/dependency-management-deep-dive.md)

Commit message:

Add Tutor CLI setup instructions to all tutorials
Updated the main README and all tutorial READMEs to include steps for installing the Tutor CLI and adding it to PATH. This improves onboarding by ensuring users have the required tooling before starting each lesson.

tutorials/04-multimedia-midi2/README.md, after:

# 04 – Multimedia with MIDI2

Template-first workflow: `setup.sh` scaffolds a minimal Swift package from the FountainAI monorepo; build and run locally to explore the concept.

Play audio and synchronize your UI using MIDI 2.0 timing. This lesson shows TypeScript snippets for a browser/Node context; your minimal Swift package scaffolding is for project structure only and does not execute the TS directly.

## Before you begin
- Install Tutor CLI and add to PATH (see docs/tutor-cli.md and docs/shells-and-git.md).
- Run all commands from `tutorials/04-multimedia-midi2/`.
- If needed, make the script executable:
  ```bash
  chmod +x setup.sh
  ```

## Scaffold the project
By default this tutorial uses the `ai` profile. If you plan to use Swift MIDI2 libraries locally, run with the `midi2` profile:

```bash
./setup.sh --profile midi2 --upstream
```

Advanced: `./setup.sh --upstream` (or `SETUP_MODE=upstream ./setup.sh`) attempts to scaffold via the upstream monorepo and copy its generated files here; falls back to local if it fails.

## Playing audio (TypeScript)

Load a MIDI file and route it into an `AudioContext`. The player will handle decoding and playback once `play()` is called:

```ts
import { Midi2Player } from '@fountainlabs/midi2';

const context = new AudioContext();
const player = new Midi2Player({ context });

await player.load('/assets/cue.mid');
player.play();
```

## Synchronizing UI via MIDI2 (TypeScript)

During playback, the player emits timing information that can drive interface updates. Listen for `position` events to keep the UI in sync with the audio:

```ts
player.on('position', (seconds) => {
  document.querySelector('#time').textContent = seconds.toFixed(1);
});
```

## Play/Pause controls (HTML + TypeScript)

Hook simple controls into the player with standard DOM events:

```html
<button id="play">Play</button>
<button id="pause">Pause</button>
<script type="module">
  import { Midi2Player } from '@fountainlabs/midi2';

  const context = new AudioContext();
  const player = new Midi2Player({ context });
  await player.load('/assets/cue.mid');

  document.getElementById('play').addEventListener('click', () => player.play());
  document.getElementById('pause').addEventListener('click', () => player.pause());
</script>
```

These snippets demonstrate how audio playback and UI synchronization can be achieved using MIDI 2.0. Use a simple static server or bundler to run them.

## Build and run (Swift package)
Compile and launch the minimal Swift package (for structure only):

```bash
../../tools/tutor-cli/.build/release/tutor-cli build
../../tools/tutor-cli/.build/release/tutor-cli run
```

Expected: Swift package builds successfully. The MIDI2 examples run in a browser or Node environment.

## Run tests
```bash
../../tools/tutor-cli/.build/release/tutor-cli test
```
Keep Swift tests focused on any local helpers; test TS code with your chosen runner (e.g., Vitest) in a separate step.

## Troubleshooting
- AudioContext blocked: user gesture may be required before playback in some browsers.
- Asset path: ensure `cue.mid` resolves (serve from `/assets/` or adjust `load()` path).
- TypeScript types: install `@types/node` or browser typings if bundling for the web.

## Next steps
Proceed to [05 – AI Integration with OpenAPI](../05-ai-integration-openapi/README.md) to call AI endpoints.

## See also
- [Deep dive: Dependency management with SwiftPM and profiles](../../docs/dependency-management-deep-dive.md)
